---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/non-direct/004-attentional-focus-in-aiming/","title":"Attentional Focus in Aiming","dg-note-properties":{"title":"Attentional Focus in Aiming"}}
---


Achieving a higher level of aiming competence isn't only from repetition and the act of training your mechanics, the way you shape your focus and cognitive architecture is just as important if not even more important. Attentional focus is a framework to base which type of focus falls into the two category of **internal** and **external** focus. An internal focus places more attention into your own bodily mechanics, putting more focus in how you move your hand, the physical plane of your body. External focus places more attention on the outcome or the desired result you are aiming for, focusing more on the crosshair, how it moves, how it interacts with the target. While both focus are beneficial, there are specific cases where one is favoured over the other, in our case of aim training, external focus is the preferred focus in 90% of the activity we are doing.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Why External Focus Works Better For Aiming</font>**
The biggest and most obvious answer is that external focus promotes automaticity, meaning you will instinctively aim (according to your current skill level) without conscious interruption. Compared to internal focus, an external focus uses less of your cognitive load, making you easily pay attention on the more critical information by not focusing on how you should move your hand. This is the main reason why having an external focus can also help you avoid second-guessing yourself in critical moments where split second decisions matters.

External focus promotes better perception-action coupling by directly linking your visual input (crosshair and target) to your motor input (moving the mouse). This approach is very beneficial in real game scenarios, which is also where most people feel like they're time spent on training are not having an effect. There are more valuable thing in a real game scenario that is placed higher on the priority list compared to your aim and mechanical skill, things such as positioning, utility usage, and movement as an example of some. In moments where you feel that you are slipping into internal focus, start to shift your attention to other aspect of the game or the scenario.

However, this doesn't mean that external focus or automaticity is the best and correct way of learning. There are several nuances that comes into play when looking at improvement as a whole and where we should place our focus.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Why Internal Focus Can Feel Necessary</font>**
Consciously thinking about your aim can feel necessary if your goal is to specifically improve your mechanical performance, and in certain cases it is beneficial to consciously think about the way you aim, but it should always be done in **retrospect**. It might seem counter-intuitive to not focus on how you are moving the mouse, especially when you first start learning aiming techniques, and to an extent, brief or short-bursts of internal focus is needed to understand the basic movements required in aiming. Internal focus can also be beneficial in troubleshooting by briefly checking internal mechanics in down times (between scenarios or at the end of a round/match), but the fix should then be integrated while focusing externally. Examples of checking your internal mechanics are: 

- Is my wrist too stiff?
- Is my arm positioned awkwardly?
- Is my shoulder using excessive tension?
- Am I sitting up straight with good posture?

The keyword to all of this would be **down time** and that putting focus internally should be done in retrospect, for example, when you are VOD reviewing. The crucial mistake is carrying this internal focus into live performance or trying to consciously execute the *fix* mid-action, confusing diagnosing a mechanical flaw, where internal focus is often times needed, with correcting it during execution. 

In a live match, the tactical demand is too high to place your focus internally, this why the shift to external focus should happen as soon as possible when your main goal is in-game improvements, this can be more easily achievable by the help of third-party aim training applications. You should trust your level of aiming competence to happen reflexively, if you find that it's not meeting your desired level it should be analysed during a training period, not while performing in-game.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Constraint Action Hypothesis and Mechanical Improvements</font>**
The Constrained Action Hypothesis (CAH) is the most widely accepted theoretical framework that explains the advantages that external focus has over internal focus. This hypothesis propose that when performers place their attentional focus into internal mechanics, they tend to constrain or interfere with the body's inherent, automatic control process. This conscious interference disrupts the natural self-organizing capabilities of our motor system, leading to movements that are less efficient and less effective. The CAH's emphasis on conscious interference is directly related to the phenomenon often referred to as "choking under pressure". In the context of aiming, which is also a motoric activity in itself, the interference of our body's automatic control process is still needed to a certain degree to further develop our skill. The process of "rewiring" our body's automatic control is essentially the process of replacing sub-par "instinctive corrections" with proper aiming techniques, we're conditioning our body to adapt and replace our less-than-optimal "instinctive corrections" with proper aiming techniques. 

Put it simply, we're training our "unconscious aim" to be better by first putting conscious effort into learning the proper correct mouse movement by utilizing internal focus in a controlled training environment, an environment best captured by the use of dedicated third-party aim training applications. The controlled environment of an aim trainer is where deliberate internal focus strives due to the design of it being something close to a training gym. This is where you asses your weaknesses, learn new concepts in aiming, and further refine your aiming skill, this is where you acquire your aiming skill. During the skill acquisition period, it's required that you put your focus internally in many of it's phases such as when you're reviewing your gameplay or when learning a new technique. This process is meant to break your bad habits and introduce better habits by the use of technique, this is what leads to having your reflexive aim better and have it be a factor you can fall back on instinctively.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Closing</font>**
Understanding what attentional focus is a useful knowledge to further your improvements, whether it's in aiming mechanics or in your actual performance. The simplified conclusion is that internal focus is best used in scenarios where you are analysing yourself, developing new and unfamiliar technique, being a helping hand when you're required to reflect on your own performance when viewed retrospectively. External focus is best used in scenarios where your main goal is performing and not analysing or diagnosing a problem, it's most commonly used in-game and in live matches to help free up your cognitive load since other aspects are often times more important compared to aim and mechanical skill.