---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/non-direct/005-discipline-vs-motivation/","title":"Discipline vs Motivation","dg-note-properties":{"title":"Discipline vs Motivation"}}
---

Motivation is something that players often look for when they feel stuck or starting to burn out, something I myself am familiar with. However, there are a few things I want to discuss about motivation and mostly it's role when compared to discipline. Understanding the difference between them is something I find valuable to any players at any skill level, but it becomes very beneficial for players that are earlier in their improvement level, players in the novice to intermediate skill range. Firstly, motivation still has its use and I do believe that it's needed to push ourself and give ourself a hopeful boost, but it's important to also know where discipline overshines motivation.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Why Motivation Can Be Unreliable</font>**
Motivation is a mesolimbic reward system, the brain's pathway that releases dopamine, which we all know that dopamine is nice and good. The problem is that dopamine mostly spikes in anticipation of a reward rather than during the process of training, say something like hitting a high score in our case. This becomes flawed when a training session doesn't produces "fun" moments like hitting a high score or a dopamine hit since it can lead a dopamine crash that also leads to discouragement in your training. The "crash" usually manifests itself as feeling a lack of drive to finish the reps or your training session or inconsistent training. This is why motivation can be an unreliable source of drive for you to improve. Discipline, however, helps players maintain engagement during unpleasant or mentally draining process of aim improvement, it helps you recognize that those tedious parts are necessary for long-term growth, regardless of how boring it may seem at the moment.

These tedious and unpleasant process of aim improvement usually comes from frustrating scenarios, scenarios you find boring to play, or the process of VOD reviewing. From my own personal experience and from the sentiments I get from most of the players I interact with, the boring scenarios is usually the main struggle. Scenarios like Centering is something really boring, however when knowing its role in our development in the long run, it becomes more bearable. Finding enjoyment in those boring scenarios won't be instant, reframing your approach will take time, same as it is with breaking bad habits, so it's better to start sooner than later. 
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Getting Used to Practicing Consistently</font>**
Another benefit of building your discipline is that eventually your training sessions becomes a daily part of your day-to-day routine, finding a time where you consistently train. There are a few methods or framework you can use to build discipline and make your practice more deliberate.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">1. Distributed Practice</mark>
A 4-hour "grind" session will lead to fatigue and diminishing returns, often accelerating your burn out. This is mainly caused by losing focus by the mid-point of your session and ultimately results in you autopiloting. Practicing for 20 minutes per-day provides significantly better results compared to a 1 hour session you do only once a week. The 20 minutes session can fit in most peoples schedule if we're being completely honest with ourselves, it's just a matter of wanting to do it or not. Skipping a couple of days is fine, however don't equalise taking breaks with being lazy.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">2. Spaced Repetition</mark>
By definition, spaced repetition and distributed practice are the same, however for the sake of diversifying the methodology, I take some liberty while still keeping the main idea inline with the core concept. I make this distinction to explain another method of practice where you take breaks during a single day between your training blocks. Say for example, want to dedicate a day to practicing Static Clicking, you can learn a wide range of aspect that's prevalent in it. With spaced repetition in mind as our method, we can divide each aspect into it's own dedicated training blocks. An example can be spending 10 minutes focusing on initial flicking technique, having a break, continuing the practice with another 10 minutes section this time focusing on micro-corrections. This breaks up your training period into distinct blocks and gives you time to rest and intake the knowledge or feedback gained from each training blocks.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">3. Interleaving Practice</mark>
This method used to be somewhat popular amongst the aim training community, it's also a method that's brought up constantly by Krascsi and RiddBTW. Essentially, you are randomizing the scenarios and/or the aiming category in a single training session, like having 1w4ts and then have something like kinTS, then having Ground Plaza Voltaic, random scenarios that doesn't necessarily feeds into one another. The main benefit of this training method is that you're forced to adapt, it forces your brain to adapt to different solutions/technique required by a given scenario. In my opinion, this methodology is a bit archaic, but it's still a scientific backed methodology and was a staple in the aim training community.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">4. Score Threshold</mark>
Another method of building discipline is by using score threshold training. I'll just simply mention it in this article and won't go into the detail since we've already discussed about it in its own dedicated article.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Discipline in Higher Skill Level</font>**
You might've encountered a player being complacent, believing that once they get "good", there's no need to improve further, letting the motivation or the "love of the game" carry you the rest of the way. This is a flawed perception, especially when it comes to improvement. The root cause of it might stem from something like internal-ego and the fix to it is simple if that's the case. The highest rated and most knowledgeable raw aimer, MattyOW, considers himself to still constantly learn new things and improve every day, so why would anyone feel that they have nothing else to learn when they are, realistically, still incredibly far away from reaching even a small percentage of Matty's skill level? From a raw aiming lens, thinking your "good" is different than being actually good while offering something that can back that up.

In higher skill level, discipline also becomes a safeguard. Following a well thought out and planned training program helps protect players from feeling exhausted or having a sense of reduced accomplishments that comes after the initial excitement of rapid improvement fades. This is also something that shows up in players that are earlier in their aim progression, usually around the novice level. Starting out, improvement will be rapid and you will constantly see gains with an upward trend. This is because you're more so defining your baseline and you will come to a plateau once you've established that baseline, its important to not perceive this as you being a naturally gifted aimer that improves rapidly, that way of thinking will just limit you once you've reached a plateau and might convince you that that is simply the maximum capacity of your aiming ability.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Closing</font>**
You can still find value from motivation, usually in providing the initial spark that gets you to start your training session, however, discipline carries you the rest of the way while you are actively in that training session. Discipline provides structured and grounded system that helps you reach the long-term destination of aim improvement, differing from motivation that helps you get that first push. Think of it as getting out of bed, you need the motivation to get out of bed and start doing your daily routine which involves discipline.