---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/direct/score-threshold-training-method/","dg-note-properties":{}}
---


The score threshold method, popularized by MattyOW, is an auto-regulated form of training that shifts the focus from often mindless repetitions to the quality of your performance. Instead of playing a scenario for a fixed number of repetitions, players would play the scenario until they reach a certain threshold set by themselves, typically within the range of 90-95% of your high score but it can be whatever percentage you want it to be. Before moving forward and explaining how to incorporate this method into your training and why it works, we're going to first explain what auto-regulated training means, what goes into it, and the benefits.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Auto-Regulated Training</font>**
Auto-regulated training means that you are adjusting and adapting your training intensity, volume, or difficulty in real-time according to your performance on a given session. Instead of following the traditional fixed repetition, you use the results from your current training session in a specific scenario to determine whether you're done and ready to move to the next scenario. You are essentially holding yourself accountable of your performance and creating a discipline in how you train.

Auto-regulated training works because it keeps you engage at the "optimal challenge point". The "optimal challenge point" happens when the difficulty of a certain task is high enough to generate sufficient information for learning but not so high that performance collapses entirely. Learning is a function of the information available to you, if a task is too easy or too hard, the information for growth isn't there or isn't as optimal as it could be, which is why finding your "optimal challenge point" can help you progress better and be as engaged as possible during training. This method of training triggers the release of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter associated with focus and attention, which marks specific neural circuits for change. In a much more simpler terms, this tells your brain to correct itself and change with the information available from your training, which will often happens sub-consciously.

This also manages fatigue and how engaged you are at your training session. Using fixed repetitions means that you progress as long as you've finished the specific number of repetition listed in a given scenario regardless of how engaged you are or how well you perform. Let's say you're only able to perform at 60% level of engagement at a certain day while training, you're going into the training with the risk of just going through the motions due to your engagement level, further reinforcing bad habits rather than having a meaningful training session. This is also what's commonly referred to as autopiloting.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Combatting Autopilot</font>**
A scenario might have a set nominal difficulty, a difficulty determined by the scenario, think of the Novice/Intermediate/Advanced levelling of most scenarios. However, there is also what's called functional difficulty, this refers to how difficult scenario feels like relative to yourself in that moment, this changes day by day or even session by session based on your fatigue and focus.

We can look at autopiloting as you perceiving the functional difficulty of a scenario to be low due to your lack of focus or fatigue, which leads to sub-optimal training sessions from your brain not bothering in trying to change what you're doing wrong from your lack of engagement with your training session. This is what usually leads to stagnation and plateaus.

By consciously setting a goal and needing to reach that goal before moving forward, you're introducing an aspect that "gatekeeps" you from progressing until you are finished with the current task in hand. How fast you can past the current task can vary too from day to day, sometimes only requiring 3-5 runs to reach your score threshold, sometimes needing 20 minutes to even get close to your threshold. There are guaranteed moments of frustration, which is good for learning as you need a reasonable amount of frustration to "place" your brain into its learning state. Further along this document, we will cover how we can avoid spending too much time in one scenario.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">How To Set The Threshold</font>**
Like we've previously mentioned in the start, the score threshold is usually within the range of 90-95% of your high score, but this threshold can be whatever number you want as long as it still provides a reasonable challenge for you. For example, if you haven't played much or any precision tracking in a month, it would be unrealistic for you to set a score threshold 2% off of your high score, it would be too high of a demand considering you haven't been practicing or playing much of that category lately. This goes the other way as well, if you set a threshold too low, say 15% off of your high score, it makes it too easy for you to reach it and isn't enough to challenge your performance.

I personally usually set a score threshold between 7-2% off of my high score depending on the aim category and what I'm currently focusing on. I usually set a higher threshold for benchmark scenarios or in a scenario where I want to improve my leaderboard placement. I would typically set the score threshold around 2-3% off of my high score and if I find myself hitting that threshold easily, I continue to play that scenario several more times to further push my performance. I continue to push since typically a high score occurs when you are averaging your runs at 1% off of your high score.

The general rule is to just set the threshold in a reasonable range, don't make it too easy or too hard, make it challenging but make it still be reasonable.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Setting A Limit</font>**
To prevent over training and spending too much time on one scenario, set a limit to how long you can attempt to hit a threshold in a certain scenario. This limit can be whatever you want it to be, but same as setting a score threshold, be reasonable with the amount of time you give a single scenario.

I usually set different time limits depending on if my current session is focused on playing a playlist or grinding a specific scenario. When playing a playlist, I usually give a time limit of 5-10 minutes per scenario depending on the length of the playlist. I also give myself micro-breaks in between each scenarios played, usually being spent with stretching to maintain health and prevent injuries. If I'm grinding a specific scenario, I typically set the time limit to 20-30 minutes and then take breaks whenever I hit the time limit, coming back to it with the choice of switching to a different scenario or continuing my grind on that same scenario. I take longer breaks when grinding a single scenario, this is just to prevent burn outs and ensure that I'm as engaged as possible when playing that scenario. The typical player can only be fully engaged for as long as 20-30 minutes, though this varies from player to player, but that's why I chose that range of duration as my time limit for single scenario grinding.

Setting a time limit is different from "giving up" on the scenario. You frame it as you needing to hit a score threshold within a specified amount of time, you are aware of the time limit and your main goal is to perform and hit your goal before that time runs out. You can look at this as "playing to win" instead of "playing to not lose", where one puts a more conscious effort of hitting your goal and not just perform at the bare minimum to not lose. I myself see it as "failing" the scenario instead of "giving up", meaning there are some aspects that are preventing me reaching that goal and would require me to be more reflective to fix those gaps in my performance to better prepare myself the next time I try
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Reframing How You See High Scores</font>**
Changing how we look at high scores is a fundamental shift in our approach to aim training. Instead of viewing your personal best as a representation of your skill level, you see it as your current skill ceiling. When we reframe how we perceive high scores, we start to stop chasing the one-off peak and dopamine of a new personal best, instead we start to focus on our skill floor and our average performance.

We are trying to move from a result-oriented mindset to a process-oriented mindset, we are trying to find the enjoyment in our day-to-day improvement instead of the result from said improvement. This doesn't mean that you can't celebrate new high scores, it's still important that you find enjoyment in your high scores no matter how small it might seem. We first need to acknowledge that a benchmark rank is not a guaranteed representation of how you easy you will win gunfights against other players, instead it's what would happen if we somehow perform at our best. There are a few benefits of reframing how we see high scores, and a few of them are going to be talked about below.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">1. Improving Our Skill Floor</mark>
The biggest and most obvious benefit is that it forces you to improve your average and skill floor. By using a score threshold, you aren't constantly setting your goal as the next rank you want to achieve, but an achievable goal while still providing a challenge. Think of it as you "re-learning" or "stabilizing" your performance on days where you don't feel like you can perform to your maximum capability.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">2. Valuable Volume</mark>
Most people would reset the run until they either get the perfect spawn, the perfect target movement, relying more on RNG. This is a very common thing that happens to everyone no matter their skill level, I myself am guilty of this. While I do still find resetting to be useful in cases where your main objective is just purely grinding a scenario, it's still considered as "junk volume", repetitions for the sake of better scores. You can think of it as something similar to ego-lifting. Shifting our perspective to our overall process of improvement, we can hopefully find a new enjoyment in improving the small things, such as our average score, which is often overlooked by players.
###### <mark style="background:#ff4d4f">3. Protecting Our Psychology</mark>
Chasing new high scores every day is a perfect recipe for burning out faster, I myself has experienced this in the past during my grind to Astra in Voltaic S2 Aimlabs. Reframing how we see high score can help us stabilize our psychological and emotional dynamic state, or in a more simpler terms, make us "tilt" less often. Another thing that this help is the feeling of not improving and losing our motivation, something all too common amongst players.
### **<font color="#00b0f0">Closing</font>**
While we start out by just discussing a specific training methodology, the details and the reasoning is important to know as a logical fallback for us, it's needed to help convince us and help understand if this training method is fitting for you. Like we mentioned previously, this is popularized by MattyOW and I wouldn't have looked into it and trying to understand deeply if it weren't for him, so I highly encourage you to show your support to MattyOW in any way you can.